Support k8s resources (#54)
eclipse-ankaios/ankaios: agent/doc/swdesign/README.md

The following diagram shows the structural view of the Ankaios Agent:

![Overview](drawio/unit_overview.drawio.svg)

### AgentManager

The AgentManager is the entry component in the Ankaios agent and is responsible, amongst others, for receiving commands from the server and forwarding them to the RuntimeManager and for authorizing requests from the workloads to the Ankaios Server.

The initial setup of the Ankaios agent is done in the main.rs is also counted as part of this unit.

### RuntimeManager

The RuntimeManager holds a list of RuntimeFacades (more precisely a list of runtime connectors wrapped into a RuntimeFacade) and a list of running workloads. It is also responsible for the handling the update workload calls including the workload reuse and the logic of translating the added and deleted workload lists into commands to a RuntimeFacade or a WorkloadObject.

### RuntimeFacade

> The RuntimeFacade wraps some common actions shared between all runtime connectors, s.t. they don't need to be implemented multiple times. The RuntimeFacade is responsible for creating, resuming and replacing a WorkloadObject including the start of the workload control task. The RuntimeFacade is also responsible for providing functionality for deleting a workloads that do not have an internal WorkloadObject (found unneeded workloads started in a previous execution of the Ankaios agent).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The RuntimeFacade wraps some common actions shared between all runtime connectors, s.t. they don't need to be implemented multiple times. The RuntimeFacade is responsible for creating, resuming and replacing a WorkloadObject including the start of the workload control task. Furthermore, The RuntimeFacade is responsible for providing functionality for deleting workloads that do not have an internal WorkloadObject (found unneeded workloads started in a previous execution of the Ankaios agent).
```

### WorkloadObject

A WorkloadObject represents a workload inside the Ankaios agent. It holds the control interface and the sender for the communication channel with the workload control task. The WorkloadObject is also responsible for managing the workload control task.

### ParameterStorage

> Stores information which the Agent gets from the Server. Currently the storage stores the workload status and mapping from workload name to runtime name.

Reviewer: Is this still correct, I think the runtime name mapping is not stored anymore in the parameter storage?

In the code it is like the following: HashMap<AgentName, HashMap<WorkloadName, ExecutionState>>

```suggestion
Stores information which the Agent gets from the Server. Currently the storage stores the workload state of workloads for each agent.
```

### ControlInterface

The ControlInterface is responsible for setting up the communication interface between a workload and the Ankaios agent. It translates between the provided to the workload pipes and the internal Ankaios communication channels.

### RuntimeConnectorInterfaces

> This is not really a component but defines the "requirements" towards specific runtime connectors s.t. they can be used by Ankaios. Three traits need to be implemented by each specific connector:

Author: ```suggestion
This is not really a component but a collection of traits that define the "requirements" towards specific runtime connectors s.t. they can be used by Ankaios. The following three traits specify the interface of the connectors where for one of them (state checker) a reusable default implementation is provided:
```

Comment:
Please note that the object creation is targeted here and thus also resume or replace of running workloads is in scope.

Rationale:
The workload object is later used to update or delete the workload. The object also stores the ControlInterface for the workload and manages it during the lifetime of the workload.

Tags:
- RuntimeManager

Needs:
- impl
- utest

#### Handling the initial UpdateWorkload after Agent start

The following diagram and the subsequent requirements show the steps the Ankaios Agent takes when receiving the first UpdateWorkload command sent by Server. The first UpdateWorkload contains the complete initial list of workloads the Agent shall manage.

![Handling initial UpdateWorkload](plantuml/seq_update_workload_initial.svg)

##### RuntimeManager initial list of workloads handles existing workloads
`swdd~agent-initial-list-existing-workloads~1`

Status: approved

After receiving the complete list of added workloads from the Ankaios Sever at the initial connection establishment, the RuntimeManager shall handle existing workloads.

Comment:

> In case the Agent was already running, the Runtime Adapter can take care of Workloads that were started in an earlier execution. Some of these workloads can be reused, some have to be updated and some stopped.

Reviewer: I think the "Runtime Adapter" shall be replaced by the new term (the "RuntimeManager" inside this comment.

Author: ```suggestion
In case the Agent was already running, the RuntimeManager can take care of Workloads that were started in an earlier execution. Some of these workloads can be reused, some have to be updated and some stopped.
```

Tags: 
- RuntimeManager

Needs:
- impl
- utest

##### RuntimeManager handles existing workloads by building list
`swdd~agent-existing-workloads-finds-list~1`

Status: approved

When handling existing workloads, the RuntimeManager shall call each RuntimeFacade to request a list of existing workloads started during the same machine runtime window by a previous execution of an Ankaios Agent with the same name as the currently running Agent.

Comment:

> A 'machine runtime window' is the time between the start and shutdown of the machine. Finding existing workloads needs to be done fore stating new workloads in order to avoid conflicts. If this call fails, the agent currently ignores the failure assumes that no workloads are running. It must be confirmed that this behavior is correct.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A 'machine runtime window' is the time between the start and shutdown of the machine. Finding existing workloads needs to be done before stating new workloads in order to avoid conflicts. If this call fails, the agent currently ignores the failure assumes that no workloads are running. It must be confirmed that this behavior is correct.
```

Tags: 
- RuntimeManager

Needs:
- impl
- utest

##### RuntimeFacade forwards list reusable workloads call
`swdd~agent-facade-forwards-list-reusable-workloads-call~1`

Status: approved

When receiving a call to list all reusable workloads, the RuntimeFacade shall forward the call to the wrapped runtime and return the list to the caller.

Comment:

> No decoupling is done here and we wait for the list to be build in order to prevent race conditions with calls from the server.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
No decoupling is done here and we wait for the list to be built in order to prevent race conditions with calls from the server.
```

Status: approved

When requested, the RuntimeFacade replaces a workload by:
* request the wrapped runtime to delete the old workload
* request the wrapped runtime to create a workload with the new config(incl. starting the state checker monitoring it)
* start the workload task waiting for stop or update commands for that workload
* return a new workload object allowing the communication with the task handling the stop or update commands

Comment:
No need to specifically ask for starting the state checker at that point as runtimes are expected to always create a state checker when creating a workload.

Rationale:
The task handling stop and update commands is needed to ensure maintaining the order of the commands for a workload while not blocking Ankaios to wait until one command is complete.

Tags:
- RuntimeFacade

Needs:
- impl
- utest

##### RuntimeManager handles existing workloads deletes unneeded workloads
`swdd~agent-existing-workloads-delete-unneeded~1`

Status: approved

When handling existing workloads, for each found existing workload that is not in the provided list of initial workloads, the RuntimeManager shall request the RuntimeFacade to delete the workload.

> If the the Runtime Adapter finds an existing Workload that is not in the provided list of initial workloads, the Ankaios Agent shall stop the existing Workload.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If the the RuntimeManager finds an existing Workload that is not in the provided list of initial workloads, the Ankaios Agent shall stop the existing Workload.
```

> 

Author: Yep, looks like I overlooked this one. It's fixed now.

Comment:
A 'machine runtime window' is the time between the start and shutdown of the machine. Finding existing workloads needs to be done fore stating new workloads in order to avoid conflicts. If this call fails, the agent currently ignores the failure assumes that no workloads are running. It must be confirmed that this behavior is correct.

Tags: 
- RuntimeManager

Needs:
- impl
- utest

##### RuntimeFacade forwards list reusable workloads call
`swdd~agent-facade-forwards-list-reusable-workloads-call~1`

Status: approved

When receiving a call to list all reusable workloads by the wrapped runtime, the RuntimeFacade shall directly forward the call and return the list.

Comment:
No decoupling is done here and we wait for the list to be build in order to prevent race conditions with calls from the server.

Tags: 
- RuntimeFacade

Needs:
- impl
- utest

##### RuntimeManager handles existing workloads starts new only if not found
`swdd~agent-existing-workloads-starts-new-if-not-found~1`

Status: approved

> When handling existing workloads, the RuntimeManager shall only request the corresponding RuntimeFacade to start workloads that are not already running.

Author: ```suggestion
When handling existing workloads, the RuntimeManager shall only request the corresponding RuntimeFacade to start workloads that are not found on the system.
```

`swdd~podman-create-workload-mounts-fifo-files~1`

Status: approved

When the Podman runtime connector is called to create workload and the RuntimeFacade requests to mount the Control Interface pipes,
the Podman runtime connector shall mount the the Control Interface pipes into the container in the file path `/run/ankaios/control_interface`.

Tags:
- RuntimeConnector
- ControlInterface
- PodmanRuntimeConnector

Needs:
- impl
- utest

###### Podman get workload id uses label
`swdd~podman-get-workload-id-uses-label~1`

Status: approved

When the Podman runtime connector is called to get workload id, 
the Podman runtime connector shall use the label `name` stored in the workload.

Tags:
- RuntimeConnector
- PodmanRuntimeConnector

Needs:
- impl
- utest

###### Podman delete workload stops and removes workload
`swdd~podman-delete-workload-stops-and-removes-workload~1`

Status: approved

When the Podman runtime connector is called to delete workload,
the Podman runtime connector shall stop and remove the workload.

Tags:
- RuntimeConnector
- PodmanRuntimeConnector

Needs:
- impl
- utest
- stest

##### Podman-kube runtime connector

> TODO describe the functions of the specific runtime connector

Reviewer 2: New requirements have been created.

`swdd~agent-workload-task-executes-update~1`

Status: approved

When the control task started during the creation of the workload object receives an update command, the workload task shall:
* delete the old workload via the corresponding runtime connector
* stop the state checker for the workload
* create a new workload via the corresponding runtime connector (which creates and starts a state checker)
* store the new Id and reference to the state checker inside the workload control task

Comment:
For details on the runtime connector specific actions, e.g., delete, see the specific runtime connector workflows.

Rationale:
The workload task allows to asynchronously carry out time consuming actions and still maintain the order of the actions as they are queued on a command channel.

Tags:
- WorkloadObject

Needs:
- impl
- utest

##### Workload task update broken allowed
`swdd~agent-workload-task-update-broken-allowed~1`

Status: approved

When the workload control task has no old workload to delete during the update of a workload, the control task shall continue with the update.

Comment:
The assumption here is that the old workload is not running anymore.

Rationale:

> This allow to bring the system into a working state.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This allows to bring the system into a working state.
```

Tags:
- WorkloadObject

Needs:
- impl
- utest

##### Workload task update delete failed allows retry
`swdd~agent-workload-task-update-delete-failed-allows-retry~1`

Status: approved

When the workload control task encounters a failure while deleting the old workload during the update of a workload, the control task shall continue allowing a subsequent update or delete attempt.

Rationale:

> This allow to try the update again instead of going in an undefined state.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This allows to try the update again instead of going in an undefined state.
```

Tags:
- WorkloadObject

Needs:
- impl
- utest

##### Workload task update create failed allows retry
`swdd~agent-workload-task-update-create-failed-allows-retry~1`

Status: approved

When the workload control task encounters a failure while creating a new workload during the update of a workload, the control task shall continue allowing a subsequent update or delete attempt.

Rationale:

> This allow to try the update again instead of going in an undefined state.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This allows to try the update again instead of going in an undefined state.
```

Tags:
- WorkloadObject

Needs:
- impl
- utest

##### Agent adds on update missing workload
`swdd~agent-add-on-update-missing-workload~1`

Status: approved

When the Ankaios Agent gets an `UpdateWorkload` message that indicates an update of a workload and the workload cannot be found, the RuntimeManager shall trigger adding of the workload.

Comment:
This situation cannot actually occur, but if a workload is requested to be added it shall also be added instead of just tracing an error/warning. 

Tags:
- RuntimeManager

Needs:
- impl
- utest

##### Agent deletes workload on command from server
`swdd~agent-deletes-workload~1`

Status: approved

When the Ankaios agent receives an `UpdateWorkload` message with a workload for deletion that is not also listed as added workload, the agent shall trigger a deletion of the workload.

Tags:
- RuntimeManager

Needs:
- impl
- utest

##### Workload handles delete command
`swdd~agent-workload-obj-delete-command~1`

Status: approved

> When the WorkloadObject receives a trigger to deletion the workload, it:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When the WorkloadObject receives a trigger to delete the workload, it:
```

Needs:
- impl

###### Podman runtime connector uses CLI
`swdd~podman-uses-podman-cli~1`

Status: approved

The Podman runtime connector shall use the Podman CLI.

Tags:
- PodmanRuntimeConnector

Needs:
- impl
- utest

###### Podman get name returns `podman`
`swdd~podman-name-returns-podman~1`

Status: approved

When the Podman runtime connector is called to return its unique name, the Podman runtime connector shall return `podman`

Tags:
- PodmanRuntimeConnector

Needs:
- impl
- utest

###### Podman list of existing workloads uses labels
`swdd~podman-list-of-existing-workloads-uses-labels~1`

Status: approved

When the Podman runtime connector is called to return list of existing workloads, 
the Podman runtime connector shall use the label `agent` stored in the workloads.

Tags:
- PodmanRuntimeConnector

Needs:
- impl
- utest

###### Podman create workload runs the workload object
`swdd~podman-create-workload-runs-workload~1`

Status: approved

When the Podman runtime connector is called to create workload, the Podman runtime connector shall:

* pull the workload image specified in the runtime configuration if the image is not already available locally
* create the workload object

> * start the workload object in the detached mode

Reviewer 2: Fixed

Rationale:
The data stored in this volume is needed, if the agent is restarted to find existing workloads.
It is created before applying the manifest, to ensure the running workload can always be found,
even if the agent crashes during the creation of the workload.

The data is stored in a label and not as content of the volume, as this is easier to implement using the Podman CLI.
Storing the data as content of the volume:

* makes it necessary to put it in a TAR archive, and import it with `podman volume import`.
* does not work with a remote podman instance.

Tags:
- PodmanKubeRuntimeConnector

Needs:
- impl
- utest

Covers:
- swdd~functions-required-by-runtime-connector~1

###### Podman kube create workload creates pods volume
`swdd~podman-kube-create-workload-creates-pods-volume~1`

Status: approved

When the Podman kube runtime connector is called to create a workload and the manifest is successfully applied by the Podman kube runtime connector,
the Podman kube runtime connector shall store the pods in a volume:

* the pod list is encoded as JSON
* the JSON data is stored base64 encoded in the label `data` of the volume

Rationale:

> The data stored in this volume is needed, if the agent is restarted to recreated the Podman kube workload ID.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The data stored in this volume is needed, if the agent is restarted to recreate the Podman kube workload ID.
```

Tags:
- PodmanStateChecker
- PodmanRuntimeConnector

Needs:
- impl
- utest

##### PodmanStateChecker returns removed state
`swdd~podman-state-checker-returns-removed-state~1`

Status: approved

When the `PodmanStateChecker` is called to get the current state over the state getter interface and
the `PodmanStateChecker` gets empty list of current states, the `PodmanStateChecker` shall return the state removed.

Rationale:
This happens when the container has been removed and the Agent meanwhile triggers status check of the workload.

Tags:
- PodmanStateChecker
- PodmanRuntimeConnector

Needs:
- impl
- utest

##### PodmanStateChecker returns unknown state
`swdd~podman-state-checker-returns-unknown-state~1`

Status: approved

When the `PodmanStateChecker` is called to get the current state over the state getter interface and
the `PodmanStateChecker` is unable to read the container state (error or too many current states read), the unknown state shall be returned.

Comment:
In other words the unknown state shall be the default state.

Tags:
- PodmanStateChecker
- PodmanRuntimeConnector

Needs:
- impl
- utest

#### Podman-kube runtime connector specific state getter

> TODO

Reviewer 2: New requirements have been created.

Needs:
- impl
- utest
- stest

###### Podman-kube create workload creates pods volume
`swdd~podman-kube-create-workload-creates-pods-volume~1`

Status: approved

When the podman-kube runtime connector is called to create a workload and the manifest is successfully applied by the podman-kube runtime connector,
the podman-kube runtime connector shall store the pods in a volume:

* the pod list is encoded as JSON

> * the JSON data is stored base64 encoded in the label `data` of the volume

Reviewer: How is this volume named then? Because above you already store the runtimeConfig in the volume base64 encoded in the label `data`.

Author: ```suggestion
* the JSON data is stored base64 encoded in the label `data` of the volume
* the name of the volume shall be the workload execution instance name suffixed with ".pods"
```
